In the growth toward spirituality, an important step in the process is
the experience of mental silence because mental silence facilitates a
unique, outside perspective on one's own mental activity. Discussion
of mental silence has appeared in diverse fields of study such as
artificial intelligence (Fields, 2002), studies of consciousness
(Forman, 1998), and neurophysiology (Ramamurthi, 1995), but rarely in
psychology.  There are no self-report measures that focus on mental
silence and the few scales that tap proximate constructs do so with
few items in a tangential way (e.g., Burris, 1999; Hood, 1975;
Maranell, 1974; and Pekala, 1998). The present study aims to develop
and validate a new scale that focuses on the experience of mental
silence.

Participants are being recruited on the Internet and through the
University of Virginia psychology subject pool. Data will be analyzed
using Item Response Theory (IRT). IRT is the state-of-the-art
quantitative method for analyzing survey data. IRT offers the
advantages that an unbiased estimate of item parameters can be
obtained from an unrepresentative sample, and item and person
estimates are located on the same interval scale.

Since mental silence may be related to flow (Orme-Johnson, 2008),
religion, spirituality, and meditation (Forman, 1997), mental silence
ought to be of concern to positive psychologists.  Little is known
about the distribution of familiarity with mental silence within
homogeneous populations and cross-culturally.  Are some contexts more
or less conducive to mental silence?  How does familiarity with mental
silence change over the lifespan?  There are specific interventions
that aim to increase familiarity with mental silence, but are some
more effective than others?  A valid, simple to administer self-report
measure is not a panacea, but would be an important tool that could
begin to shed light on these questions.
